Mel Frequency Cepstral Coefficients
In sound processing, the mel-frequency cepstrum (MFC) is a representation of the short-term power spectrum of a sound, based on a linear cosine transform of a log power spectrum on a nonlinear mel scale of frequency.

Mel-frequency cepstral coefficients (MFCCs) are coefficients that collectively make up an MFC. They are derived from a type of cepstral representation of the audio clip (a nonlinear "spectrum-of-a-spectrum"). The difference between the cepstrum and the mel-frequency cepstrum is that in the MFC, the frequency bands are equally spaced on the mel scale, which approximates the human auditory system's response more closely than the linearly-spaced frequency bands used in the normal cepstrum. This frequency warping can allow for better representation of sound, for example, in audio compression.

The main point to understand about speech is that the sounds generated by a human are filtered by the shape of the vocal tract including tongue, teeth etc. 
This shape determines what sound comes out. If we can determine the shape accurately, this should give us an accurate representation of the phoneme being produced.  The shape of the vocal tract manifests itself in the envelope of the short time power spectrum, and the job of MFCCs is to accurately represent this envelope.

Steps involved in computing MFCCs:
  1. The speech signal goes through a pre-emphasis filter to balance frequency spectrum.
  2. Then gets sliced into (overlapping) frames and a window function is applied to each frame.
  3. Afterwards, we do a Fourier transform on each frame and calculate the power spectrum; and subsequently compute the filter banks. 
  4. To obtain MFCCs, a Discrete Cosine Transform (DCT) is applied to the filter banks retaining a number of the resulting coefficients while the rest are discarded.
  5. The final step is mean normalization. The MFCCs are the amplitudes of the resulting spectrum.
  
  
